---
source_url: 
ingested: 2026-05-05
sha256: 46211d5326e2682fc3d30eacb37e460e8acd8d4c4686606ab864ba36f8bd6180
---

# - DOUBLE PROJECTION FOR RECONSTRUCTING DYNAM - ICAL SYSTEMS: BETWEEN STOCHASTIC AND DETER MINISTIC REGIMES 

**Viktor Sip, Martin Breyton, Spase Petkoski & Viktor Jirsa** Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, INS, Inst Neurosci Syst, Marseille, France _{_ viktor.sip,martin.breyton,spase.petkoski,viktor.jirsa _}_ @univ-amu.fr 

## ABSTRACT 

Learning stochastic models of dynamical systems from observed data is of interest in many scientific fields. Here, we propose a new method for this task within the family of dynamical variational autoencoders. The proposed double projection method estimates both the system state trajectories and the noise time series from data. This approach naturally allows us to perform multi-step system evolution and to learn models with a comparatively low-dimensional state space. We evaluate the performance of the method on six benchmark problems, including both simulated and experimental data. We further illustrate the effects of the teacher forcing interval of the multi-step scheme on the nature of the internal dynamics and compare the resulting behavior to that of deterministic models of equivalent architecture. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Many scientific fields are concerned with building mathematical models of dynamical systems underlying the observed data. Over the last decade, works using artificial neural networks to achieve this goal in a data-driven fashion have emerged, showing considerable promise (Durstewitz et al., 2023; Legaard et al., 2023). Compared with the related task of time series prediction, the problem of dynamical system reconstruction (DSR) is differentiated by the following aspects: focus on the long-term dynamics of the trained system, an interest in the interpretable structure of the variables and the latent space, and reasoning and analysis of the learned system by the conceptual and computational tools from dynamical system theory. 

Many of the influential DSR approaches assume that the underlying dynamics is deterministic (Brunton et al., 2016; Pandarinath et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Hess et al., 2023). Indeed, finding a deterministic model that can accurately predict future behavior, matches the long-term properties observed in the data, and correctly generalizes to new conditions can be viewed as the ultimate goal of DSR. To capture the long-term dependencies and patterns present in the data, the training methods for deterministic models often use multi-step prediction. Such an approach, however, can lead to exploding or vanishing gradients and unstable training, especially for chaotic systems. To alleviate the problem, teacher forcing strategies for dynamical system reconstruction have been developed and analyzed (Mikhaeil et al., 2022; Hess et al., 2023). 

Finding the deterministic system underlying the data is often infeasible due to the complexity of the generating process or limited experimental data. Furthermore, reconstructing a deterministic model might not even be desirable if the resulting model is too computationally demanding for the intended purposes. In such cases, relying on a stochastic framework might be a preferred alternative. Stochastic models include a source of noise in the dynamical equations, in addition to the noisy observations that are commonly used with deterministic models. An influential family of methods for training models of stochastic systems are Dynamical Variational Autoencoders (DVAE, Girin et al., 2021), a specific form of variational autoencoders (VAE, Kingma & Welling, 2014) for time series data. A multi-step prediction with DVAE methods requires further adaptation of the framework. As a notable example, a _latent overshooting_ approach (Hafner et al., 2019) was developed by modifying the 

1 

cost function to use an _n_ -step predictive distribution. Using this method for multi-step prediction, the noise has to be sample from the prior distribution of the stochastic variables. 

In this work, we propose a new variant of the DVAE approach using a double projection strategy, where we map the observations to both the system states and noise time series, on which we train the dynamical model. It has several nice properties: First, it allows us to train models with comparatively low-dimensional state space, more suitable for analysis than high-dimensional recurrent neural networks used in other DVAE approaches. Second, its special case is a fully deterministic method, allowing investigation of the role of stochasticity by comparison of the stochastic and deterministic variants. Third, it allows us to perform multi-step prediction by sampling the noise from the posterior distribution, which we hypothesize can lead to better performance. 

To evaluate the performance of the method, we test the method on six test problems, including models of both deterministic chaos and noise-driven dynamics, and experimental data. Then, we investigate the effect of the teacher forcing interval on the nature of resulting dynamics, showing that the low values of the teacher forcing interval lead to deterministic dynamics, while large values result in a stochastic regime influenced by noise. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

**Teacher forcing.** The idea of teacher forcing for training deterministic recurrent neural networks (RNNs) consists of replacing the generated system states by the observed ones at predefined intervals in order to ensure that the generated trajectory stays close to the data. The ideas emerged early in the context of training RNNs (Williams & Zipser, 1989; Doya, 1992). Adaptive schemes with variable teacher forcing intervals were later developed (Bengio et al., 2015). In the context of dynamical system reconstruction of chaotic systems, the approach was analyzed by Mikhaeil et al. (2022). A variant named generalized teacher forcing, wherein the states are interpolated between the generated and teacher system states, was developed by Hess et al. (2023). 

**Stochastic models for DSR.** A range of methods to train a stochastic dynamical system from data was developed and explored in recent years. A commonly used approach for this task is Dynamical Variational Autoencoders (Girin et al., 2021), which merges the probabilistic state space models with the framework of variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014). The key components of the approach are an encoder network that maps the observations into the time series of latent variables, a discrete-time state space model parameterized by a flexible neural network, a decoder that maps from the latent space back to the observations, and a training method based on minimizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO). The pioneering works often focused on other applications than DSR, among them are Deep Kalman Filters (Krishnan et al., 2015; 2017) with latent variables being corresponding to the states of the system, Stochastic Recurrent Networks (Bayer & Osendorfer, 2015) with latent variables representing the noise time series, or Variational Recurrent Neural Networks (Chung et al., 2016) and Recurrent State Space Models (Hafner et al., 2019), which combine deterministic and stochastic states. In the explicit context of DSR, Kramer et al. (2022) used the VAE framework to integrate multimodal data. Hernandez et al. (2020) trained state-dependent linear networks, reusing the generative model inside the recognition model. Sip et al. (2023) used coupled stochastic models to learn a model of brain network dynamics. 

**Multi-step prediction in stochastic models.** Several approaches have been developed to facilitate training with multi-step prediction for methods from the DVAE family. Amos et al. (2018) introduced a multi-step deterministic rollout, comparing the predicted and actual observations ( _observation overshooting_ ). Noting that projecting the system states to observations at every step can be costly for 2D image observations, Hafner et al. (2019) compared the predictions in latent space ( _latent overshooting_ ) using multi-step predictions with noise sampled from the prior distribution. Li et al. (2021) investigated both observation and latent overshooting, and used prior distribution for noise samples. 

**Non-VAE stochastic models for DSR.** Different methods than dynamical VAEs for training neural network based models of stochastic dynamics exist. Koppe et al. (2019) used the expectationmaximization (EM) method, where the latent states of the dynamical model are optimized directly, as opposed to through an encoder. Kramer et al. (2022) compared the EM method with a VAE-based 

2 

**==> picture [268 x 106] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
A B<br>Teacher forcing (training only) Sampling<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 1: Graphical summary of the DPDSR method. (A) Generation, visualized for teacher forcing interval _τ_ = 2. (B) Encoding. For brevity, we use a shorthand for the posterior distributions _q_ ( _ϵt_ ) instead of _q_ ( _ϵt |_ _**x** ,_ ˆ _**z** ,_ _**ϵ**_ 1: _t−_ 1). 

approach, concluding better performance of EM compared to VAE for smaller problems, but at a cost of limited flexibility. Pals et al. (2024) trained stochastic low-rank recurrent neural networks using the variational sequential Monte Carlo method (Naesseth et al., 2018). Other works use a parameterization other than neural networks for the stochastic generative model. Linderman et al. (2017) rely on a collection of linear dynamical systems with state-dependent probabilistic switching between them, leading to an interpretable representation. Using Gaussian processes to represent the dynamics of the generative model (Doerr et al., 2018; Garc´ıa et al., 2022) naturally links the notion of uncertainty of the dynamics, but it requires careful choice of the kernel and is limited to low-dimensional state spaces. 

## 3 METHODS 

## 3.1 DOUBLE PROJECTION DYNAMICAL SYSTEM RECONSTRUCTION 

In this study, we consider a dataset of _N_ system observations with dimension _dx_ over _T_ time steps _{_ _**x**_[(] 1: _[i]_[)] _T[∈]_[R] _[T][ ×][d][x][}] i[N]_ =1[.][Our aim is to learn an underlying dynamical system] 

**==> picture [80 x 25] intentionally omitted <==**

with system states _zt ∈_ R _[d][z]_ , system noise _ϵt ∈_ R _[d][ϵ]_ of possibly lower dimension _dϵ ≤ dz_ , and observation noise _ηt ∈_ R _[d][x]_ . 

For this goal, we introduce a new variant of VAE-based methods. Compared to existing VAE-based approaches, it combines two convenient features. First, it separates computational expressivity from the size of the latent state, leading to comparatively low-dimensional latent spaces, more convenient for the analysis of its dynamical structures. Second, it allows us to naturally perform multi-step prediction using samples from posterior distribution of the noise. The existing approaches either use only a single-step prediction _p_ ( _zt|zt−_ 1) (e.g. Deep Kalman Filter (Krishnan et al., 2015; 2017)), perform multi-step rollout using deterministic dynamics (Amos et al., 2018), or sample the noise in multi-step rollout from the prior distribution of the noise (Hafner et al., 2019; Li et al., 2021). We speculate that samples from the prior distributions are insufficient to approximate the highdimensional integrals associated with multi-step rollout. Our proposed method, on the other hand, multi-step rollout can be performed with samples from posterior distribution of the noise. 

To achieve this, our method uses trained encoders to estimate both the system states and the system noise. We name the method Double Projection Dynamical System Reconstruction (DPDSR, Fig. 1). Given one sample of the observed time series _**x**_ 1: _T_ , it first estimates the (possibly partial) state space trajectory _**z**_ ˆ1: _T_ , and subsequently also the noise time series _**ϵ**_ 1: _T_ . Then, starting from the estimated initial conditions, the system is evolved according to the trained dynamical system and using the estimated noise time series. Every _τ_ steps, the state of the dynamical system is set to the estimated state _z_ ˆ _t_ . To calculate the loss function, the match of the generated trajectories to the observations _**x**_ 1: _T_ and the estimated state space trajectory _**z**_ ˆ1: _T_ is combined with the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of the latent variables _**ϵ**_ 1: _T_ from the white noise prior. 

3 

In the following text, we write _**x**_ = _**x**_ 1: _T_ (and analogously for other variables) for readability. 

**Generative model** We consider a generative model of the following form: 

**==> picture [258 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

The evolution function has the form of a two-layer perceptron with residual connection, 

**==> picture [274 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

with _σ_ ( _z_ ) being the ReLU function. The tanh nonlinearity is added to stabilize the dynamics and training by constraining the states to a finite interval. The observation function is a two-layer perceptron, _g_ ( _zt_ ) = _W_ 2 _[g][σ]_[(] _[W][ g]_ 1 _[z][t]_[ +] _[b][g]_ 1[)+] _[b][g]_ 2[.][In the examples presented here, we use a one-dimensional] noise ( _dϵ_ = 1) injected into the last dimension only, so that _B_ = [0 _, . . . ,_ 0 _, σϵ_[2][]] _[T][∈]_[R] _[d][z][×]_[1][.][The] observation covariance matrix is diagonal and isotropic, Σ _η_ = _ση_[2] _[I]_[.] 

**Encoder** The encoding process has two steps. First, from the observed timeseries _**x** ∈_ R _[T][ ×][d][x]_ we compute a deterministic estimation of the system state timeseries _**z**_ ˆ _∈_ R _[T][ ×][d][z]_[ˆ] . These can be possibly only partial estimation of some dimensions of the states, _dz_ ˆ _≤ dz_ . We use a WaveNet architecture (van den Oord et al., 2016), which is based on 1D dilated convolutional networks. Unless specified otherwise, we use a single stack of seven dilated convolutional layers (Tab. S1). The output of the last layer is linearly projected to an estimation _**z**_ ˆ. We are using non-causal layers, although we also train an auxilliary causal stack, which we use for prediction tasks (Sec. A.3.1). 

_**x**_ In the second step, we estimate the posterior distribution and estimated states _**z**_ ˆ. The noise _**ϵ**_ serve as the latent variable in our VAE framework. _q_ ( _**ϵ** |_ _**x** ,_ ˆ _**z**_ ) from the observed time seriesWe use an autoregressive Gaussian posterior, _q_ ( _ϵt |_ _**x** ,_ ˆ _**z** ,_ _**ϵ**_ 1: _t−_ 1) = _N_ ( _ϵt | µt_ ( _**x** ,_ ˆ _**z** ,_ _**ϵ**_ 1: _t−_ 1) _, σt_ ( _**x** ,_ ˆ _**z** ,_ _**ϵ**_ 1: _t−_ 1)). The means _µt_ and variances _σt_ are computed by passing the input timeseries through a WaveNet block with the same architecture as in the first step, followed by an autoregressive LSTM with probabilistic output. This autoregressive form of the posterior distribution serves to increase the expressivity of the encoder of the posterior distribution. 

**Training and loss function** For each time series _**x**_ , the data is first projected to estimate of state _**z**_ ˆ and noise _**ϵ**_ via the described encoders. If the projection to state space is only partial, the initial conditions are completed by a trainable linear projection to the remained states,˜ ˆ ˜ _z_ 0 = [ˆ _z_ 0; _finit_ (ˆ _z_ 0)]. Otherwise, the initial projected state is used, _z_ 0 = _z_ 0. The system is then evolved according to the generative model (1), using a random sample _**ϵ**_ from the posterior distribution. Using teacher forcing, every _τ_ -th step the simulated state is replaced by the estimated state, 

**==> picture [319 x 25] intentionally omitted <==**

Here, _Tdz_ ˆ: _dz_ is a truncation matrix selecting the elements from the _dz_ ˆ-th to the last _dz_ -th dimension; that is, the remaining states for which the state was not estimated are left to evolve freely. 

For each sample _**x**_ , the loss function is composed from the reconstruction loss of _**x**_ and _**z**_ **ˆ** , and the KL term of the latent noise variables _**ϵ**_ 

**==> picture [250 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

The reconstruction loss of the observation is 

**==> picture [271 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

˜ where _p_ ( _**x** |_ _**z**_ ) =[�] _t[p]_[(] _[x][t][|][g]_[(˜] _[z][t]_[)] _[,]_[ Σ] _[η]_[)][using][the][observation][function] _[g]_[and][covariance][Σ] _[η]_[from] (1). We treat the estimated states as additional observations with identity mapping, we find that such an approach helps to stabilize the training. Therefore, the reconstruction loss of the estimated partial states is similar to the observation reconstruction loss, apart from replacing the observation operator by the identity function on the estimated states: 

**==> picture [270 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

4 

˜ where _p_ (ˆ _**z** |_ _**z**_ ) =[�] _t[p]_[(ˆ] _[z][t][|][T]_[1:] _[d] z_ ˆ _[z]_[˜] _[t][,]_[ Σ] _[z]_[ˆ][)][ with] _[ T]_[1:] _[d] z_ ˆ[being the truncation matrix selecting the first] _dz_ ˆ states, and the covariance matrix being diagonal and isotropic, Σ _z_ ˆ = _σz_[2] ˆ _[I]_[.][Finally, the KL term] in the loss follows the standard formulation of variational autoencoders, 

_L_[KL] = _D_ KL( _q_ ( _**ϵ** |_ _**x** ,_ ˆ _**z**_ ) _∥ p_ ( _**ϵ**_ )) _._ (7) 

We use a prior of standard normal distribution _p_ ( _**ϵ**_ ) = _N_ ( _**ϵ** |_ 0 _, I_ ). In addition, two regularization terms are added to the loss. First, to favour sparse observation models, it is L1 regularization on the weights of projection _g_ . Second, to encourage desired scale of the state trajectories, it is a regularization term for the scale and position of the estimated states. The loss function is minimized using Adam optimizer. Further details of the architecture and training are given in Sec. A.3.1. 

## 3.2 COMPARED METHODS 

**Single projection DSR** (SPDSR) is a deterministic variant of DPDSR. It uses the same architecture and teacher forcing training method, but it assumes that there is no noise in the dynamical system. The noise encoder is therefore absent, and the KL divergence term does not appear in the loss function (4). **Generalized teacher forcing** (Hess et al., 2023) is a method for reconstruction of deterministic dynamical system, and has been shown to outperform other deterministic methods. We use an approach with time delay embedding (GTF-TD) where the observation is first projected to the state space so that the full state can be forced. We used PECUZAL method for the time delay embedding (Kraemer et al., 2021), and where this failed, we defaulted to a delay embedding with constant offset and predetermined dimension _d_ = 8. **Deep Kalman Filter** (DKF) (Krishnan et al., 2015; 2017) is a method for reconstruction of stochastic systems. Using an encoder, it estimates the states of the system, while the one-step stochastic prediction of the generative model forms the basis of the loss function. Our implementation here mirrors the architecture of our proposed method where possible (in the architecture of the encoder and of the generative model), with the main difference being the form of the loss function. **Autoregressive LSTM** (AR-LSTM) (Graves, 2014) uses a standard LSTM network whose probabilistic output is fed back to the network at the next step, thus forming a stochastic dynamical system. During training, the original time series are used to feed the network, or can be replaced by the model generated output following the ideas of scheduled sampling (Bengio et al., 2015). **Recurrent State Space Model** (Hafner et al., 2019) combines a deterministic recurrent neural network with stochastic states as its generative model. During training, the stochastic states are estimated during rollout from the deterministic states and observations. We evaluate two variants: a single-step prediction variant (RSSM), and a multi-step variant with observation overshooting (RSSM-OO). The generative models of all methods were approximately matched in number of parameters (Tab. S2). 

## 4 RESULTS 

**Example: Double well model** First, we demonstrate the working of the methods on an example of stochastic dynamics: a noise driven double well model (Fig. 2). The double well dataset (Sec. A.1.3) is generated by numerical integration of a stochastic differential equation of bistable dynamics followed by four layers of exponential smoothing, 

**==> picture [164 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

with parameters _σ_ scaling the noise amplitude and _α_ being the temporal constant of exponential smoothing. We assume only the last variable _z_ 5 is observable. The model has two stable fixed points, _zi_ = _±_ 1 _, i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . ,_ 5 _}_ . 

As shown on Fig. 2C, reconstruction methods based on deterministic dynamics do not perform well on this problem. A good time delay embedding cannot be found for time series generated by stochastic dynamics, and GTF-TD fails to reproduce the bistable nature of the time series. The embedding-based method using deterministic dynamics (SPDSR) performs better and is able to reproduce the bimodal distribution of the data via chaotic dynamics, but a quantitative evaluation in the following section will reveal the inferior match compared to the stochastic method. Among the stochastic methods, all of DPDSR, DKF and RSSM in both variants reproduce the bimodal nature of the data well. Autoregressive LSTM performs better than the deterministic methods, but worse than embedding-based stochastic methods. 

5 

**==> picture [397 x 126] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
A Data B DPDSR C<br>Data<br>1 DPDSR<br>1 SPDSR<br>0 z5 0 z2 GTF-TD<br>1 DKF<br>1<br>ARLSTM<br>1 1<br>RSSM<br>1 0 1 0<br>z3 0 1 1 z4 z6 0 1 1 z4 RSSM-OO 0 200 400 600 800 1000<br>Time<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 2: Results for the double well dataset. (A) Trajectory in the original state space of the model. The dots represent the stable fixed points of the model. (B) Simulated trajectory in the state space of the DPDSR model (hand-picked dimensions). (C) Original time series, and time series generated by the trained models. Here, and in all other figures, the time is represented in sample indices and not the original model time. 

**==> picture [397 x 199] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Score Distribution distance Spectral distance PE20<br>Lorenz DPDSR<br>SPDSR<br>GTF-TD<br>Cell cycle<br>DKF<br>ARLSTM<br>Double well RSSM<br>RSSM-OO<br>RNN<br>Neuron<br>ISI<br>ECG<br>0 1 2 0.0 0.2 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 5 10<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 3: Reconstruction quality of the evaluated methods for the six datasets. The panels show the overall score, distribution distance _Dd_ , spectral distance _Ds_ , the 20-step prediction error PE20, and the distance interspike interval distributions _D_ ISI (lower = better for all measures). Each circle represent one of twelve initializations of the training method, and the bar shows the mean. For clearer visualization, the results were clipped to the shown interval. 

**Quantitative evaluation** For a more detailed evaluation of the DPDSR method, we test it on six datasets (Sec. A.1): 1) Lorenz, the well-known classic example of deterministic chaos (Lorenz, 1963). Even though training models of deterministic chaos is not the main target of the work, it is an important special case for stochastic methods too; 2) Cell cycle, a six-dimensional model of cell division cycle, generated by a deterministic chaotic model (Romond et al., 1999); 3) Double well, the dataset described above; 4) RNN, time series generated by a large recurrent neural network in chaotic regime (Sompolinsky et al., 1988), of which only one variable is observed. Due to the complexity of the model and minimal observation, we expect that the deterministic dynamics cannot be recovered, and stochastic model would prove to be a better alternative; 5) Neuron, an experimental dataset of somatic voltage of a rat pyramidal neuron driven by random and unknown stimulus current (Jolivet et al., 2006); 6) ECG, an electrocardiogram signal of a healthy adult (Reiss et al., 2019). 

We evaluate the quality of the reconstruction based on three criteria (Sec. A.5). First, the distribution distance _Dd_ : the similarity of the spatial distributions of the original and model-generated 

6 

data. Specifically, we generate long time series with the trained model, collapse the data across time, and compare the distributions using Wasserstein distance. Second, the spectral distance _Ds_ : the similarity of the original and model-generated data in the frequency domain. We compute the power spectra of the original and model-generated data, and compare those using the Hellinger distance. And third, the short-term prediction error PE20 of the model-generated trajectories when starting from a state estimated from past data. For the ECG dataset, we also include the distance of interspike intervals _D_ ISI as an important measure of the reconstruction quality. We summarize these measures in a cumulative score, which we define as a weighted sum of the described measures, _S_ = _w_ 1 _Dd_ + _w_ 2 _Ds_ + _w_ 3PE20 + _w_ 4 _D_ ISI. Considering the different nature of the datasets, we set the weights differently for the different datasets in order to reflect the importance of the measures for each specific dataset (Sec. A.5). The results of the separate components are however also presented. 

We train the models as described in Sec. 3 and Sec. A.3. For each method, we perform a parameter sweep over selected hyperparameters, and for each parameter combination we train the model with sixteen random initializations, of which we discard four worst for each method. We then select the best model as the one with the lowest average score across initializations. The resulting scores for all problems are presented on Fig. 3, and examples of generated time series are on Fig. S3. 

We summarize the results in three main points. First, for the datasets generated by low-dimensional deterministic models (Lorenz and Cell cycle), we see a good performance of deterministic models, either based on time delay embedding (GTF-TD) or trained projection (SPDSR). Our stochastic model is, however, competitive in all three measures. DKF performs badly, mainly due to its limited prediction capacity. 

Second, for the Double well, RNN, and Neuron datasets, where the time series are dominated by random (or seemingly random) effects on short time scales, the stochastic models DPDSR, DKF, and RSSM show the best performance. The deterministic models (SPDSR and GTF) have to approximate the random transitions through deterministic chaos; the SPDSR projection method does it better than the GTF-TD method based on the time embedding. We note that for these three dataset, the state of the art PECUZAL embedding failed and we used embedding with fixed delay and number of dimension instead. Thus, a worse performance of the time embedding method can be expected. The stochastic AR-LSTM method stands in between the two groups. 

Third, for the ECG dataset, several method are capable of learning a dynamical system that can generate the periodic ECG signal (Fig. S3). However, the variations of the interspike intervals (ISI) in the data are not reproduced by the deterministic models SPDSR and GTF (Fig. 3, rightmost column), leading also to higher spectral distance and higher overall score. Of the stochastic methods, only our proposed DPDSR method and the multi-step RSSM-OO method can produce the variations in the interspike intervals. Of these two, the RSSM-OO method is more robust to weight initialization. 

**Internal dynamics of the trained models** To better understand the behavior of the proposed DPDSR method, we now analyze the trained models using tools from dynamical systems theory. Specifically, we look at the nature of the attractors of the deterministic part of the trained generative models. For contrast, we compare the results with those from the deterministic SPDSR models. Apart from the absence of the noise, to SPDSR method is identical to the DPDSR in the architecture and training procedure. As such, it provides a useful comparison point for the differences of the stochastic and deterministic methods. 

In Fig. 4A we show the maximal Lyapunov exponent of the attractors in the trained models for all six datasets. For each dataset and method, we first detect the attractors by evolving the system from randomly initialized points, and then estimated the maximal Lyapunov exponent (Sec. A.6). The results show that the DPDSR method learns dynamical system exhibiting deterministic chaos for the Lorenz and Cell cycle dataset, both of which are indeed generated by a chaotic system. As shown also on Fig. 2, the model trained on the Double well problem has two stable fixed points (with noise driven transitions between them). The similar RNN problem results in a noise-driven fluctuations around a single fixed point. The variations in the interspike intervals in the ECG model are due to noisy fluctuations around a stable limit cycle. 

In contrast, the best performing deterministic models trained with the SPDSR method exhibit chaotic dynamics in all cases. Indeed, in the absence of noise, deterministic chaos is the only option to model the random transitions of the Double well and RNN datasets, or spikes of the Neuron datasets. 

7 

**==> picture [397 x 115] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
A DPDSR SPDSR B Double well - DPDSR C Double well - SPDSR<br>0.1 1.5 0.1 1.5<br>Lorenz 200<br>Cell cycle 0.0 1.0 150 0.0 1.0<br>Double well<br>RNN 100<br>0.1 0.5 0.1 0.5<br>Neuron 50<br>ECG<br>0.2 0.0 0 0.2 0.0<br>0.1 0.0 10    20 40 60 80100 200 10    20 40 60 80100 200<br>max<br>max KL max<br>Score Score<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 4: Analysis of the attractors of the trained models. (A) Maximal Lyapunov exponent _λ_ max for the models trained on the six datasets. Each point correspond to one attractor. Dashed circle outline represents a chaotic attractor ( _λ_ max _>_ 0), colored solid outline represents a limit cycle, and black solid outline a fixed point. Size of the circle corresponds to the size of the basin of attraction. (B) Influence of the teacher forcing interval _τ_ on the attractors in the DPDSR models. Circles show the maximal Lyapunov exponent as in (A). Solid red line shows the score (lower = better). Dashed green line shows the KL divergence of the estimated posterior distribution of the noise to the prior distribution KL _ϵ_ = _D_ KL( _q_ ( _**ϵ** |_ _**x**_ ) _∥ p_ ( _**ϵ**_ )). The yellow band indicates the optimal _τ_ value for the dataset. (C) As in (B), but for the deterministic SPDSR models. 

Next, we explore the role of the teacher forcing interval _τ_ on the performance and nature of the dynamics of the trained models. The double well model (Fig. 4B,C) illustrates the phenomena that are to a large extent consistent across all datasets (Fig. S4). In the stochastic DPDSR model, we observe that for smaller intervals ( _τ ≤_ 40) the trained models contain chaotic attractors, and they do not rely on the noise. We quantify this by the KL divergence of the estimated posterior distribution of noise from the prior distribution, KL( _q_ ( _**ϵ** |_ _**x**_ ) _∥ p_ ( _**ϵ**_ )), averaged across all samples. If the two distributions overlap, the KL divergence is zero, and no information is encoded in the posterior distribution. As the interval _τ_ increases, the models transition into the regime of noisedriven dynamics with two stable fixed points. This is complemented by the increasing importance of the noise, so that the observed dynamics can be generated by noise-driven fluctuations. 

Such behavior is mostly consistent for DPDSR models across datasets, with variations in the position of the transition into the noise-driven regime or the number and nature (fixed point or limit cycle) of the stable attractors. However, the position of the optimal model can differ: it is located in the deterministic chaos regime for Lorenz and Cell cycle, or stochastic regime for Double well, RNN, Neuron, and ECG problems. In the deterministic SPDSR models, contrastingly, the stochastic regime cannot exist by construction. The models therefore mainly stay in the chaotic regime. The best performing models are found for lower teacher forcing intervals _τ_ , and the score worsens for increasing values. This behavior matches the results reported by Mikhaeil et al. (2022) when training deterministic models using a teacher forcing scheme on the data from Lorenz system, forced Duffing oscillator, and empirical temperature time series. 

**Choice of the teacher forcing interval** An important question for practical applications of the method is how to select the teacher forcing interval _τ_ . In this work, we have performed a parameter sweep across a range of values. Such approach, while robust, is costly in terms of computational time. Existing works proposed several approaches to similar issues in deterministic models. Mikhaeil et al. (2022) used teacher forcing interval equal to the predictability time of a chaotic system 

**==> picture [224 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

with _λ_ max being the maximal Lyapunov exponent estimated ahead from the data; they showed that such estimates match closely the optimal values. Hess et al. (2023) introduced an adaptive scheme where the parameter of generalized teacher forcing is updated during the training based on the product of Jacobians of the trained system, evaluated along the forced trajectory. 

In the first approach, estimating the Lyapunov exponent from the data is performed under the assumption of deterministic chaotic system, and therefore is unsuitable for our purposes. However, a 

8 

**==> picture [397 x 98] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Lorenz Cell cycle Double well RNN Neuron ECG<br>200 200 200 200 200 200<br>100 100 100 100 100 100<br>0 0 0 0 0 0<br>0 100 200 0 100 200 0 100 200 0 100 200 0 100 200 0 100 200<br>Attracting fixed point Best solution<br>opt<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 5: Optimal value of teacher forcing interval _τ_ opt across datasets. For each value of _τ_ , we calculated the maximal Lyapunov exponent _λ_ max along the estimated trajectory using the final trained model. Following Mikhaeil et al. (2022), we calculate _τ_ opt = log 2 _/λ_ max for _λ_ max _>_ 0, and we set _τ_ opt equal to the maximal trajectory length (=200) otherwise. The red lines indicate the attracting fixed points of a relaxed fixed point iteration scheme _τi_ +1 = (1 _− α_ ) _τi_ + _ατ_ opt _,i_ if ran on the visualized relation _τ_ opt( _τ_ ) obtained from the final models, that is, they show the points of diagonal crossings with derivative smaller than 1. We assume linear interpolation between the evaluated points. The yellow line indicates the position of the best trained models, same as in Fig. S4. Note that here the Lyapunov exponents are evaluated along the estimated trajectories, and not for the deterministic attractors as in Fig. S4. For most datasets, two fixed points exist, one in the low _τ_ (deterministic) regime, and one in the high _τ_ (noise-driven) regime, indicating that the adaptive _τ_ scheme might not robustly converge to the optimal solution. 

possible option would be to combine the two methods, that is, an adaptive scheme where at each step _i_ of the training we estimate the maximal Lyapunov exponent along the forced trajectory of our stochastic system, calculate the optimal interval _τ_ opt _,i_ using (8), and adapt the parameter following a relaxed fixed point iteration scheme 

**==> picture [253 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

## with relaxation parameter _α ∈_ (0 _,_ 1]. 

For a preliminary investigation if such approach is feasible, we reanalyze the results from our parameter sweep, and calculate _τ_ opt from the final trained models for each constant value of _τ_ (Fig. 5). Using this visualization we can see where the equation _τ_ opt( _τ_ ) = _τ_ solved by scheme (9) has its attracting fixed points. These can provide an indication to which values of _τ_ might the hypothetical adaptive scheme converge. While it is not guaranteed that the adaptive scheme would converge to the same solutions as the scheme with fixed _τ_ , these results suggest that the scheme might not be sufficiently robust. On most datasets we see the existence of two attracting fixed points: one in the low range of _τ_ in the deterministic regime with chaotic dynamics, and one in the noise-driven regime, where the negative Lyapunov exponent results in the maximal teacher forcing interval. Although the best solution closely matches one of these fixed points for all but one problem, the adaptive scheme might not be able to correctly identify the optimal one. We therefore conclude that for practical purposes where robust results are required the parameter sweep remains the best option, and we highlight of task of finding the optimal teacher forcing strategy in stochastic approaches as an interesting research problem for future studies. 

## 5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

In this work we have introduced a novel method for reconstructing stochastic dynamical models from the data. The method is based on a double projection approach, where the time series of the observations are projected onto the estimates of the system states and the estimates of the driving noise using trained encoders. The estimated system states are used for teacher forcing, while the driving noise is used as the latent variable in a variational autoencoder framework. We benchmark the method on six test problems, demonstrating its performance for data generated by noise-driven models, deterministic chaotic models, and empirical data (Fig. 3). We then analyze the nature of the attractors in the learned dynamics in the examined problems, and evaluate the role of the teacher forcing interval _τ_ on it (Fig. 4 and Fig. S4). We identify the existence of two regimes occurring 

9 

across the test problems: a deterministic regime for lower values of _τ_ with chaotic attractors, and a noise-driven regime for higher values of _τ_ . 

The proposed method has some notable shortcomings and limitations. First, it is the dependency of the behavior of the trained model on the teacher forcing interval. Performing parameter sweeps across a range of values to find the best performing model, while robust, is computationally demanding. As analyzed in Sec. 4, our results indicate that an adaptive scheme for _τ_ , akin to the scheme of Hess et al. (2023), might not be sufficient to converge to the optimally performing model. The question of optimal strategy for setting the teacher forcing interval thus remains open for future studies. 

The ability of a dynamical system reconstruction method to robustly learn dynamics with diverse timescales is of great importance for many problems, and improvements could be made to our proposed methods in this direction. Gated variants of recurrent neural networks, most notably LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and GRU (Cho et al., 2014), were designed to deal with longrange temporal dependencies. Other approaches with explicit time scale separation were suggested for DSR with deterministic models, often outperforming the traditional architectures. Among the proposed approaches were: using multiple coupled RNNs operating with different temporal resolution (Liu et al., 2022; Farooq et al., 2024), regularization of the parameters of the neural network to introduce multiple time scales (Schmidt et al., 2021), separating time scales using dynamic mode decomposition before applying the DSR algorithm (Bramburger et al., 2020), or using echo state networks with different leak rates of leaky integrator neurons (Tanaka et al., 2022). Applying these ideas to stochastic models could open a way to more robust methods for problems with disparate time scales. 

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This project/research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe Programme under the Specific Grant Agreement No. 101137289 (Virtual Brain Twin Project), No. 101147319 (EBRAINS 2.0 Project), and No. 101057429 (project environMENTAL). This work has benefited from a government grant managed by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) under the France 2030 program, reference ANR-22-PESN-0012. Centre de Calcul Intensif d’Aix-Marseille is acknowledged for granting access to its high performance computing resources. 

## REFERENCES 

- Brandon Amos, Laurent Dinh, Serkan Cabi, Thomas Roth¨orl, Sergio G´omez Colmenarejo, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, Nando de Freitas, and Misha Denil. Learning Awareness Models. In _International Conference on Learning Representations_ , February 2018. URL https:// doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1804.06318. 

- Justin Bayer and Christian Osendorfer. Learning Stochastic Recurrent Networks, March 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.7610. 

- Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled Sampling for Sequence Prediction with Recurrent Neural Networks. In _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_ , volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2015/hash/ e995f98d56967d946471af29d7bf99f1-Abstract.html. 

- Jason J. Bramburger, Daniel Dylewsky, and J. Nathan Kutz. Sparse identification of slow timescale dynamics. _Physical Review E_ , 102(2):022204, August 2020. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.102. 022204. URL https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.102.022204. 

- Steven L. Brunton, Joshua L. Proctor, and J. Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_ , 113(15):3932–3937, April 2016. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1517384113. URL https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1517384113. 

- Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations. In _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_ , volume 31. Cur- 

10 

ran Associates, Inc., 2018. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2018/hash/69386f6bb1dfed68692a24c8686939b9-Abstract.html. 

- Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merri¨enboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio. On the Properties of Neural Machine Translation: Encoder–Decoder Approaches. In Dekai Wu, Marine Carpuat, Xavier Carreras, and Eva Maria Vecchi (eds.), _Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation_ , pp. 103–111, Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-4012. URL https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/W14-4012. 

- Junyoung Chung, Kyle Kastner, Laurent Dinh, Kratarth Goel, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. A Recurrent Latent Variable Model for Sequential Data, April 2016. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/1506.02216. 

- Andreas Doerr, Christian Daniel, Martin Schiegg, Nguyen-Tuong Duy, Stefan Schaal, Marc Toussaint, and Trimpe Sebastian. Probabilistic Recurrent State-Space Models. In _Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning_ , pp. 1280–1289. PMLR, July 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/doerr18a.html. 

- K. Doya. Bifurcations in the learning of recurrent neural networks. In _Proceedings of the 1992 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems_ , volume 6, pp. 2777–2780 vol.6, May 1992. doi: 10.1109/ISCAS.1992.230622. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 230622. 

- Daniel Durstewitz, Georgia Koppe, and Max Ingo Thurm. Reconstructing computational system dynamics from neural data with recurrent neural networks. _Nature Reviews Neuroscience_ , 24 (11):693–710, November 2023. ISSN 1471-0048. doi: 10.1038/s41583-023-00740-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-023-00740-7. 

- Junaid Farooq, Danish Rafiq, Pantelis R. Vlachas, and Mohammad Abid Bazaz. RefreshNet: Learning multiscale dynamics through hierarchical refreshing. _Nonlinear Dynamics_ , 112(16): 14479–14496, August 2024. ISSN 1573-269X. doi: 10.1007/s11071-024-09813-3. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071-024-09813-3. 

- Constantino A. Garc´ıa, Paulo F´elix, Jes´us M. Presedo, and Abraham Otero. Stochastic embeddings of dynamical phenomena through variational autoencoders. _Journal of Computational Physics_ , 454:110970, April 2022. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2022.110970. URL https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.110970. 

- William Gilpin. Chaos as an interpretable benchmark for forecasting and data-driven modelling. In _Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2)_ , August 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= enYjtbjYJrf. 

- Laurent Girin, Simon Leglaive, Xiaoyu Bie, Julien Diard, Thomas Hueber, and Xavier AlamedaPineda. Dynamical Variational Autoencoders: A Comprehensive Review. _Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning_ , 15(1-2):1–175, 2021. ISSN 1935-8237, 1935-8245. doi: 10.1561/2200000089. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.12595. 

- Alex Graves. Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks, June 2014. URL http: //arxiv.org/abs/1308.0850. 

- Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James Davidson. Learning Latent Dynamics for Planning from Pixels. In _Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning_ , pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, May 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/hafner19a.html. 

- Daniel Hernandez, Antonio K. Moretti, Shreya Saxena, Ziqiang Wei, John Cunningham, and Liam Paninski. Nonlinear Evolution via Spatially-Dependent Linear Dynamics for Electrophysiology and Calcium Data. _Neurons, Behavior, Data analysis, and Theory_ , 3(3), June 2020. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/1811.02459v3. 

11 

Florian Hess, Zahra Monfared, Manuel Brenner, and Daniel Durstewitz. Generalized Teacher Forcing for Learning Chaotic Dynamics. In _Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning_ , pp. 13017–13049. PMLR, July 2023. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v202/hess23a.html. 

- Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. _Neural Comput._ , 9(8):1735– 1780, November 1997. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. URL https: //doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. 

- Renaud Jolivet, Alexander Rauch, Hans-Rudolf L¨uscher, and Wulfram Gerstner. Predicting spike timing of neocortical pyramidal neurons by simple threshold models. _Journal of Computational Neuroscience_ , 21(1):35–49, August 2006. ISSN 1573-6873. doi: 10.1007/s10827-006-7074-5. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10827-006-7074-5. 

- Renaud Jolivet, Felix Sch¨urmann, Thomas K. Berger, Richard Naud, Wulfram Gerstner, and Arnd Roth. The quantitative single-neuron modeling competition. _Biological Cybernetics_ , 99(4):417– 426, November 2008. ISSN 1432-0770. doi: 10.1007/s00422-008-0261-x. URL https:// doi.org/10.1007/s00422-008-0261-x. 

- Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes, May 2014. URL http: //arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114. 

- Georgia Koppe, Hazem Toutounji, Peter Kirsch, Stefanie Lis, and Daniel Durstewitz. Identifying nonlinear dynamical systems via generative recurrent neural networks with applications to fMRI. _PLOS Computational Biology_ , 15(8):e1007263, August 2019. ISSN 1553-7358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007263. URL https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal. pcbi.1007263. 

- K H Kraemer, G Datseris, J Kurths, I Z Kiss, J L Ocampo-Espindola, and N Marwan. A unified and automated approach to attractor reconstruction. _New Journal of Physics_ , 23(3):033017, March 2021. ISSN 1367-2630. doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/abe336. URL https://dx.doi.org/10. 1088/1367-2630/abe336. 

- Daniel Kramer, Philine L. Bommer, Carlo Tombolini, Georgia Koppe, and Daniel Durstewitz. Reconstructing Nonlinear Dynamical Systems from Multi-Modal Time Series. In _Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning_ , pp. 11613–11633. PMLR, June 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/kramer22a.html. 

- Rahul Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Structured Inference Networks for Nonlinear State Space Models. _Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence_ , 31(1), February 2017. ISSN 2374-3468. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v31i1.10779. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/ index.php/AAAI/article/view/10779. 

- Rahul G. Krishnan, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Deep Kalman Filters, November 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05121. 

- Christian Legaard, Thomas Schranz, Gerald Schweiger, J´an Drgoˇna, Basak Falay, Cl´audio Gomes, Alexandros Iosifidis, Mahdi Abkar, and Peter Larsen. Constructing Neural Network Based Models for Simulating Dynamical Systems. _ACM Comput. Surv._ , 55(11):236:1–236:34, February 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3567591. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3567591. 

- Albert H. Li, Philipp Wu, and Monroe Kennedy. Replay Overshooting: Learning Stochastic Latent Dynamics with the Extended Kalman Filter. In _2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)_ , pp. 852–858, May 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9560811. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9560811. 

- Scott Linderman, Matthew Johnson, Andrew Miller, Ryan Adams, David Blei, and Liam Paninski. Bayesian Learning and Inference in Recurrent Switching Linear Dynamical Systems. In _Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics_ , volume 54, pp. 914–922. PMLR, April 2017. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/ linderman17a.html. 

12 

- Yuying Liu, J. Nathan Kutz, and Steven L. Brunton. Hierarchical deep learning of multiscale differential equation time-steppers. _Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences_ , 380(2229):20210200, June 2022. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2021. 0200. URL https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2021.0200. 

- Edward N. Lorenz. Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow. _Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences_ , 20(2):130–141, March 1963. ISSN 0022-4928, 1520-0469. doi: 10.1175/1520-0469(1963) 020 _⟨_ 0130:DNF _⟩_ 2.0.CO;2. URL https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1963)020% 3C0130:DNF%3E2.0.CO;2. 

- Jonas Mikhaeil, Zahra Monfared, and Daniel Durstewitz. On the difficulty of learning chaotic dynamics with RNNs. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_ , 35:11297–11312, December 2022. URL https://papers.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/ hash/495e55f361708bedbab5d81f92048dcd-Abstract-Conference.html. 

- Christian Naesseth, Scott Linderman, Rajesh Ranganath, and David Blei. Variational Sequential Monte Carlo. In _Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics_ , pp. 968–977. PMLR, March 2018. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v84/naesseth18a.html. 

- Matthijs Pals, A. Erdem Sa˘gtekin, Felix Pei, Manuel Gloeckler, and Jakob H. Macke. Inferring stochastic low-rank recurrent neural networks from neural data. _Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems_ , 37:18225–18264, December 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ 209423f076b6479ab3a4f45886e30306-Abstract-Conference.html. 

- Chethan Pandarinath, Daniel J. O’Shea, Jasmine Collins, Rafal Jozefowicz, Sergey D. Stavisky, Jonathan C. Kao, Eric M. Trautmann, Matthew T. Kaufman, Stephen I. Ryu, Leigh R. Hochberg, Jaimie M. Henderson, Krishna V. Shenoy, L. F. Abbott, and David Sussillo. Inferring single-trial neural population dynamics using sequential auto-encoders. _Nature Methods_ , 15(10):805–815, October 2018. ISSN 1548-7091, 1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/s41592-018-0109-9. URL https: //doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0109-9. 

- Alexander Rauch, Giancarlo La Camera, Hans-Rudolf L¨uscher, Walter Senn, and Stefano Fusi. Neocortical Pyramidal Cells Respond as Integrate-and-Fire Neurons to In Vivo–Like Input Currents. _Journal of Neurophysiology_ , 90(3):1598–1612, September 2003. ISSN 0022-3077. doi: 10.1152/jn.00293.2003. URL https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00293.2003. 

- Attila Reiss, Ina Indlekofer, Philip Schmidt, and Kristof Van Laerhoven. Deep PPG: Large-Scale Heart Rate Estimation with Convolutional Neural Networks. _Sensors_ , 19(14):3079, January 2019. ISSN 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s19143079. URL https://doi.org/10.3390/ s19143079. 

- Pierre-Charles Romond, Mauro Rustici, Didier Gonze, and Albert Goldbeter. Alternating Oscillations and Chaos in a Model of Two Coupled Biochemical Oscillators Driving Successive Phases of the Cell Cycle. _Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences_ , 879(1):180–193, 1999. ISSN 1749-6632. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb10419.x. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.1749-6632.1999.tb10419.x. 

- Dominik Schmidt, Georgia Koppe, Zahra Monfared, Max Beutelspacher, and Daniel Durstewitz. Identifying nonlinear dynamical systems with multiple time scales and long-range dependencies. In _International Conference on Learning Representations_ , March 2021. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/1910.03471. 

- Viktor Sip, Meysam Hashemi, Timo Dickscheid, Katrin Amunts, Spase Petkoski, and Viktor Jirsa. Characterization of regional differences in resting-state fMRI with a data-driven network model of brain dynamics. _Science Advances_ , 9(11):eabq7547, March 2023. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abq7547. URL https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abq7547. 

- H. Sompolinsky, A. Crisanti, and H. J. Sommers. Chaos in Random Neural Networks. _Physical Review Letters_ , 61(3):259–262, July 1988. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.259. URL https: //doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.259. 

13 

Julien Clinton Sprott. _Chaos and Time-Series Analysis_ . Oxford University Press, January 2003. ISBN 978-0-19-850839-7. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780198508397.001.0001. URL https://doi. org/10.1093/oso/9780198508397.001.0001. 

- Gouhei Tanaka, Tadayoshi Matsumori, Hiroaki Yoshida, and Kazuyuki Aihara. Reservoir computing with diverse timescales for prediction of multiscale dynamics. _Physical Review Research_ , 4(3): L032014, July 2022. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.L032014. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.L032014. 

- Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio, September 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.03499. 

- Ronald J. Williams and David Zipser. A Learning Algorithm for Continually Running Fully Recurrent Neural Networks. _Neural Computation_ , 1(2):270–280, June 1989. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1989.1.2.270. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1989.1.2.270. 

14 

## A SUPPLEMENTARY METHODS 

## A.1 DATASETS 

All datasets were generated or obtained and processed as described below, and all were normalized across time by subtracting the variable mean and dividing by the variable standard deviation. 

## A.1.1 LORENZ SYSTEM 

The Lorenz system (Lorenz, 1963) is a three-dimensional model exhibiting chaotic behavior, and is among the most used benchmarks in the dynamical system reconstruction field. It is described by three equations, 

**==> picture [74 x 39] intentionally omitted <==**

with parameters _s_ = 10, _r_ = 28, _b_ = 2 _._ 667. The system was simulated for _T_ = 10000 using RK45 method implemented in Scipy library with the default relative and absolute tolerances of 10 _[−]_[3] and 10 _[−]_[6] respectively. The simulated time series are exported with sampling period ∆ _t_ = 0 _._ 05, leaving 200 000 time points, divided equally into the train and test time series. Only the first variable _x_ is considered to be observed. 

## A.1.2 CELL CYCLE 

The model of cell division cycle (Romond et al., 1999) represents an example of deterministic chaos in a six-dimensional state space. It models the evolution of two coupled biochemical oscillators using six differential equations, 

**==> picture [214 x 156] intentionally omitted <==**

with 

**==> picture [170 x 49] intentionally omitted <==**

and _VM_ 1 = _UM_ 1 = 0 _._ 3, _vi_ 1 = _vi_ 2 = 0 _._ 05, _K_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 = _H_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 = 0 _._ 01, _V_ 2 = _U_ 2 = 0 _._ 15, _VM_ 3 = _UM_ 3 = 0 _._ 1, _V_ 4 = _U_ 4 = 0 _._ 05, _Kc_ 1 = _Kc_ 2 = 0 _._ 5, _vd_ 1 = _vd_ 2 = 0 _._ 025, _Kd_ 1 = _Kd_ 2 = 0 _._ 02, _kd_ 1 = _kd_ 2 = 0 _._ 001. Following Gilpin (2021), who included the model in a chaotic system collection, we set the value of the bifurcation parameter _Kim_ 1 = _Kim_ 2 = 0 _._ 65, for which a single chaotic attractor exist in the state space. 

15 

The system was simulated for _T_ = 800000 using RK45 method implemented in Scipy library with the default relative and absolute tolerances of 10 _[−]_[3] and 10 _[−]_[6] respectively, and maximum time step 0 _._ 04. The simulated time series are exported with sampling period ∆ _t_ = 5, leaving 160 000 time points, divided equally into the train and test time series. Only the first variable _C_ 1 is considered to be observed. 

## A.1.3 DOUBLE WELL 

The double well model represents a system with two fixed points and noise driven switches between the two basins of attractions. It is described by a cubic stochastic differential equation with fixed points at -1 and 1, followed by four exponential smoothing equations, 

**==> picture [164 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

with _α_ = 0 _._ 4 and additive Gaussian noise _η_ ( _t_ ) with variance _σ_[2] = 0 _._ 2. The last variable _z_ 5 is considered the observation of the system. The system is simulated with Euler-Maruyama method with ∆ _t_ = 0 _._ 2 for time _T_ = 400000, and then downsampled by a factor of 10, leaving 200 000 time points with sampling period 2, equally divided into a train and test set. 

## A.1.4 CHAOTIC RNN 

The chaotic recurrent neural network model (Sompolinsky et al., 1988) describes the activity of a population of _n_ randomly connected neurons. The dynamics of the synaptic current of the _i_ -th neuron is given by 

**==> picture [108 x 29] intentionally omitted <==**

where _ϕ_ ( _h_ ) = tanh( _h_ ), and the connectivity matrix _**J**_ contains independent random elements _Jij_ following Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and variance _g/n_[2] . We choose the factor _g_ = 2, for which the model exhibits chaotic behavior. 

We set the number of neurons _n_ = 1000, and we solve the system using RK45 method implemented in Scipy library with the default relative and absolute tolerances of 10 _[−]_[3] and 10 _[−]_[6] respectively. We solve the system for _T_ = 100000 and export with sampling period ∆ _t_ = 0 _._ 5, leaving 200 000 time points, divided equally into the train and test time series. Only the firing rate of the first neuron _ϕ_ ( _h_ 1) is taken as observed. 

## A.1.5 NEURON 

The dataset represents the voltage time series of an _in vitro_ cortical pyramidal neuron from rat barrel cortex stimulated by a randomly generated fluctuating current (Rauch et al., 2003; Jolivet et al., 2006); the dataset was also used in a spike-timing prediction competition (Jolivet et al., 2008) from which we obtained the data (https://lcnwww.epfl.ch/gerstner/ QuantNeuronMod2007/challenge.html). In the experiment, the neuron was stimulated by a current generated by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Although available in the data, here we have assumed that the input current is unknown, and aimed to estimate a stochastic dynamical model of both the neuron and the noise source. 

From the available data, we have used only one recording (00-0). The signal was sampled at 5 kHz and contained 34 000 data points, we have discarded the initial 600 and final 1200 time points where the stimulus current was not applied. The time series were smoothed with a Gaussian filter with _σ_ = 0 _._ 2 ms , normalized over time, and divided equally into the train and test time series of 16 100 time points each. 

## A.1.6 ELECTROCARDIOGRAM (ECG) 

The ECG signal captures the heart’s electrical activity over time. We have used human ECG recording from the PPG-DaLiA dataset (Reiss et al., 2019), as preprocessed and used by Hess et al. (2023). They performed smoothing and normalization of the time series, and used the signal of length 

16 

100 000 time points at sampling rate 700 Hz (duration 143 s) for both training and test dataset. We have further downsampled the time series by a factor of 4 (25 000 time points, sampling rate 175 Hz, duration 143 s for each train and test time series) for reasons of reduced computational costs. 

For the sake of consistency with other datasets in this study, we have not used the time embedding provided by Hess et al. (2023), but performed the time embedding ourselves (described below), although using the same embedding method as in the original study. Our approach resulted in 5- dimensional embedding, consistent with the results of Hess et al. (2023). 

## A.2 TIME DELAY EMBEDDING 

For all time series we first attempted to perform the time delay embedding using the PECUZAL algorithm (Kraemer et al., 2021) using the implementation in DelayEmbedding Julia module. Our settings allowed for possible delay values between 0 and 100 time points, the Theiler window _w_ was set to the first minimum of mutual information of the signal with itself, and we used the economymode for L-statistic computation, while all other arguments were set to default. The PECUZAL embedding was successfully achieved for the Lorenz system (dimension _d_ = 3), cell cycle model ( _d_ = 5), and ECG signal ( _d_ = 5). The PECUZAL embedding failed for the double well system, chaotic RNN, and the neuron recording; in these cases we used a time delay embedding with repeated delays equal to the minimum of mutual information of the signal with itself, and handselected embedding dimension _d_ = 8. 

## A.3 ARCHITECTURE AND TRAINING DETAILS 

For all methods, the same procedure was followed to train the models. For each dataset, a parameter sweep was performed over selected hyperparameters (differing across methods), and for each parameter combination, four models were trained with four different random weight initializations. The models were checkpointed during training. The models were evaluated on a separate test set in terms of the score, detailed below. The best parameter combination was chosen by the lowest score averaged across initializations. Where only one model was used for a visualization, the best performing model from the four initializations of the best performing parameter combination was used unless stated otherwise. 

## A.3.1 DOUBLE PROJECTION DYNAMICAL SYSTEM RECONSTRUCTION (DPDSR) 

The DPDSR method is described in the main text (Sec. 3). Here we describe further details. The regularization term for the observation function is an L1 regularization on the weights of the projection _g_ with coefficient _αg_ = 0 _._ 3. The regularization term for the scale and position of the estimated states aims to weakly enforce the desired scale of the state trajectories. It has the form _αz_ ˆ _D_ KL( _N_ ( _µz_ ˆ _,_ diag( _σz_[2] ˆ[)] _[∥][N]_[(0] _[, I]_[))][,][where][the][mean][and][variances][of][the][states][are][calculated] across time and samples in a batch, but not features. Denoting the sample in a batch by a superscript, _µz_ ˆ = E _b,t_ [ˆ _zt[b]_[]][ and] _[ σ] z_[2] ˆ[= Var] _[b,t]_[(ˆ] _[z] t[b]_[)][.][We are using value] _[ α][z]_[ˆ][= 0] _[.]_[001][.] 

Tab. S1 shows the parameters of the encoder model, and Tab. S2 shows the parameters of the generative model. We divide the time series into chunks of _T_ = 300, and use batch size 16. To avoid the boundary effects of the convolutional encoders, **˜** we **ˆ** evaluate the losses (5-7) on shortened trajectories _**x**_ 1+ _a_ : _T −a_ (and equally shortened _**ϵ**_ , _**z**_ , and _**z**_ ) instead of the full trajectory _**x**_ = _**x**_ 1: _T_ with _a_ = 50. 

For all test problems, the parameter grid exploration was performed over two parameters: teacher forcing interval _τ ∈_ [1 _,_ 10 _,_ 20 _,_ 40 _,_ 60 _,_ 80 _,_ 100 _,_ 200], and observation noise variance log _ση_[2] _[∈]_ [ _−_ 4 _, −_ 2 _,_ 0]. The noise variance of the estimated states was set to log _σz_[2] ˆ[=][log] _[ σ] η_[2][+ 2][to][avoid] introducing more free parameters and to reflect the secondary importance of reconstructing the estimated states compared to reconstructing the original observations. 

The loss function is minimized using Adam optimizer. The optimizer is ran for 30k batch evaluations, with learning rate starting at 0.001 and reduced by a factor of 0.3 at 10k and 20k steps. The reparameterization trick of variational autoencoders is used to sample from the posterior, with 4 samples used to evaluate the expectations in (5) and (6). We perform gradient clipping with threshold 100. The model is saved every 5000 iterations. 

17 

Table S1: Parameters of the encoder models of the DPDSR method. 

|STATE|ENCODER|NUMBER OF LAYERS|7|
|---|---|---|---|
|||KERNEL SIZE|7|
|||DILATION|[1,2,4,8,16,32,64]|
|||CHANNELS|24|
|NOISE|ENCODER|NUMBER OF LAYERS|7|
|||KERNEL SIZE|7|
|||DILATION|[1,2,4,8,16,32,64]|
|||CHANNELS|24|
|||LSTM STATE SIZE|32|



Table S2: Parameters of the generative models. 

|||LORENZ|CELL CYCLE|DOUBLE WELL|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||ECG|RNN|
|||||NEURON|
|DPDSR|STATE SIZE|5|8|8|
||F HIDDEN SIZE|256|256|256|
||G HIDDEN SIZE|32|32|32|
||# PARAMETERS|3015|4650|4650|
|SPDSR|STATE SIZE|5|8|8|
||F HIDDEN SIZE|256|256|256|
||G HIDDEN SIZE|32|32|32|
||# PARAMETERS|3046|4681|4681|
|GTF-TD|STATE SIZE|3|5|8|
||F HIDDEN SIZE|424|384|256|
||# PARAMETERS|2974|4234|4368|
|DKF|STATE SIZE|5|8|8|
||F HIDDEN SIZE|256|256|256|
||# PARAMETERS|2832|4377|4377|
|AR-LSTM|STATE SIZE|24|32|32|
||INITIAL CONDITIONS SIZE|5|8|8|
||# PARAMETERS|2642|4546|4546|
|RSSM|DETERMINISTIC STATE SIZE|24|32|32|
||STOCHASTIC STATE SIZE|4|4|4|
||HIDDEN LAYERS IN2-LAYER NETS|16|16|16|
||NUMBER OF PARAMETERS|3194|4938|4938|



**Causal encoder** The DPDSR method uses encoders based on dilated convolutional neural networks. These encoders are non-causal, that is, the estimated states _z_ ˆ _t_ at time _t_ are computed from both past and future observations, and therefore _z_ ˆ _t_ depends on all elements of _**x**_ 1: _T_ . Such approach allows to effectively gather information from the whole provided sample. However, evaluating the predictive performance of such model is difficult, as the initial state would need to be estimated also from future data, invalidating the results. For this reason, we have trained also an auxiliary causal encoder, which uses the same architecture of dilated convolutional networks, but with all connections to future observations set to zero, so that _z_ ˆ _t_ depends only on _**x**_ 1: _t_ . The causal encoder is trained in parallel with the main model. In each iteration, the loss and the gradients of the main model are first computed and the update is performed. After that, an update of the causal encoder is performed. Denoting the non-causal encoder as _F_ and causal encoder as _Fc_ , the loss function is given by 

_L[ce]_ = _∥F_ ( _**x**_ ) _− Fc_ ( _**x**_ ) _∥,_ 

that is, the causal encoder is trained so its output matches the output of the non-causal encoder. We use Adam optimizer with the same learning rate and same batch sizes as for the main model. The causal encoder is used only for the prediction tasks, while for all other purposes we are using 

18 

the non-causal variant. The noise posterior distribution is always estimated using the non-causal encoder, since for the prediction tasks the noise is sampled from the prior and not the posterior distribution, and future information is thus not leaked through it. 

## A.3.2 SINGLE PROJECTION DYNAMICAL SYSTEM RECONSTRUCTION (SPDSR) 

The architecture of DPDSR allows to consider a special case of a noise-free model by setting _B_ = 0 in the generative model (1). In this case, no noise is used in the simulations, and the noise encoder is not used; for this reason we call this special case a Single Projection Dynamical System Reconstruction (SPDSR). In effect, SPDSR is a variant of sparse teacher forcing methods for training deterministic systems, with the teacher signal estimated using the encoder based on convolutional neural networks. We use this variant as a useful comparison point, as it allows us to directly evaluate the effects of the stochastic formulation of DPDSR against a method equivalent in the architecture and training methods. 

Indeed, the architecture and training of SPDSR is equal to DPDSR, with the difference that the noise encoder is not employed, and the KL divergence term of the loss function (7) is zero. Same as for DPDSR, the parameter grid exploration was performed over teacher forcing interval _τ ∈_ [1 _,_ 10 _,_ 20 _,_ 40 _,_ 60 _,_ 80 _,_ 100 _,_ 200], and observation noise variance log _ση_[2] _[∈]_[[] _[−]_[4] _[,][ −]_[2] _[,]_[ 0]][.][As][for][the] DPDSR method, a secondary causal encoder (Sec. A.3.1) is trained and used for the prediction tasks. 

## A.3.3 GENERALIZED TEACHER FORCING (GTF) 

Generalized teacher forcing is a training method developed for training deterministic models of chaotic dynamics, and has shown a superior performance on range of problems (Hess et al., 2023). We are using the method to compare our method with state of the art method for deterministic dynamical system reconstruction. Strictly speaking, “generalized teacher forcing” refers only to the training method, but in this paper we use it as a shorthand for both the training method and the specific architecture of the generative model used in the original paper of Hess et al. (2023). 

The generative model has the form 

**==> picture [165 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

similar to our parameterization (2) apart from the diagonal matrix _A_ , the tanh transformation in our method, and absent noise. The model is trained using a generalized teacher forcing scheme. In every step, the state is replaced by a linear interpolation between the simulated state _z_ ˜ _t_ and the data _zt_ , 

**==> picture [244 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

with coefficient _α ∈_ [0; 1]. Such approach was shown theoretically to rectify to problem of exploding gradients in learning chaotic dynamics. 

We tested a variant of this approach using time embedding for state space projection. In this approach, the full states of the system are estimated using time delay embedding (GTF-TD), and these states are used in the forcing scheme (10). The observations are then equal to the states, _xt_ = _zt_ . We used the original implementation in Julia language provided by authors (https://github.com/DurstewitzLab/GTF-shPLRNN). 

We followed the example in (Hess et al., 2023) to set the method parameters. We divided the time series into chunks of size _T_ = 200 and used batch size 16. The parameters were optimized using RADAM optimizer with 5000 epochs, 50 batches per epoch, and exponential decay schedule with initial and final learning rate 10 _[−]_[3] and 10 _[−]_[6] respectively. Every 1000 epochs the model was saved and evaluated, and best performing model was kept. For all test problems, the parameter sweep was performed across the value of teacher forcing parameter _α ∈_ [0 _._ 0 _,_ 0 _._ 1 _,_ 0 _._ 2 _,_ 0 _._ 3 _,_ 0 _._ 4 _,_ 0 _._ 5]. The parameters of the generative model are given in Tab. S2. 

## A.3.4 DEEP KALMAN FILTER (DKF) 

Deep Kalman Filter (Krishnan et al., 2015; 2017) is based upon the framework of variational autoencoders applied to dynamical systems, where the states of the system _**z**_ are considered to be the 

19 

latent variables. The generative model of DKF is 

**==> picture [90 x 26] intentionally omitted <==**

We use the parameterization of the evolution function 

**==> picture [147 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

and linear observation function _g_ . This formulation differs from the one used in the DPDSR method (2) by the absence of the tanh nonlinearity; we have found that this stabilization is not needed for training the DKF models. 

During training, for an observation _**x**_ , DKF first projects the observation to a posterior distribution state trajectories _q_ ( _**z** |_ _**x**_ ). Then a state trajectory is sampled from the posterior, _**z** ∼ q_ ( _**z** |_ _**x**_ ), and the loss function for the data point is calculated as 

**==> picture [238 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

The prior for the system states is 

**==> picture [122 x 30] intentionally omitted <==**

with _p_ ( _z_ 0) = _N_ ( _z_ 0 _|_ 0 _, I_ ) and _p_ ( _zt_ +1 _| zt_ ) = _N_ ( _zt_ +1 _| f_ ( _zt_ ) _,_ Σ _ϵ_ ). The probability in the reconstruction loss is 

**==> picture [138 x 30] intentionally omitted <==**

The system and observation noise covariance matrices were assumed to be diagonal and isotropic, Σ _ϵ_ = _σϵ_[2] _[I]_[and][Σ] _[η]_[=] _[σ] η_[2] _[I]_[.][Compared][to][our][method,][the][evolution][of][the][dynamical][system][is] represented in the prior term in the KL divergence and the observation function in the reconstruction loss, while in our method both are represented in the reconstruction loss. The disadvantage of the method is that it does not allow to evolve the system more than one step from the estimated states, leading to reduced capacity to learn long-term dependencies. In the experiments, we are using the same architecture for the state encoder as for the noise encoder in the DPDSR method, that is, the encoder is composed of a stack of dilated convolutional networks followed by an autoregressive LSTM network. The same parameters as for the DPDSR noise encoder are used (Tab. S1). The loss function is minimized using Adam optimizer. The optimizer is ran for 30k batch evaluations, with learning rate starting at 0.001 and reduced by a factor of 0.3 at 10k and 20k steps. The models were saved every 5k steps. The parameter sweep was performed over the observation noise variance, log _ση_[2] _[∈]_[[] _[−]_[4] _[,][ −]_[2] _[,]_[ 0]][ and initial values of the system noise variance,] log _σϵ_[2] _[∈]_[[] _[−]_[8] _[,][ −]_[6] _[,][ −]_[4] _[,][ −]_[2]][.][As for the DPDSR method, a secondary causal encoder (Sec. A.3.1) is] trained and used for the prediction tasks. 

## A.3.5 AUTOREGRESSIVE LSTM (AR-LSTM) 

Long short-term memory (LSTM) network (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) is an established architecture of recurrent neural networks designed to handle long-term dependencies in the input data. Autoregressive LSTM model (Graves, 2014) represents one approach to introduce stochasticity in the standard LSTM network. The generative model is given by 

**==> picture [269 x 27] intentionally omitted <==**

where _ht_ and _ct_ are the hidden state and cell state vectors at time _t_ , and LSTM( _h, c, x_ ) represents the standard LSTM cell. The observation _xt_ at each step are drawn from a normal distribution, and fed back to LSTM as an input in the next step. The parameters of the normal distribution are computed by a linear projection from the hidden state 

**==> picture [94 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

20 

For training the model, the timeseries are split into chunks _**x**_ with length _T_ = _T_ past + _T_ pred. The initial conditions [ _h_ 0; _c_ 0; _x_ 0] are first estimated from the past observation of length _x_ 1: _T_ past. This is done using a stack of dilated convolutional neural networks, mirroring the architecture of the state encoder in our method. From the last layer and the last element in time the low-dimensional representation of the initial conditions _z_ 0 _∈_ R _[d]_ is computed via linear projection. Then the full dimension initial conditions are computed through two layer MLP with ReLU nonlinearity. 

From the initial conditions the system is evolved according to (11) to obtain the simulated observa-tions _**x**_ ˜ _T_ past+1: _T_ and means and variances _**µ** T_ past+1: _T ,_ _**σ** T_ past+1: _T_ . Using the principle of scheduled sampling, during the evolution the observations entering the LSTM cell are either randomly sampled from the last step prediction ( _x_ ˜ _t ∼ N_ ( _µt, σt_[2][)][) with probability] _[ γ]_[,][or replaced by the data] _[ x][t]_[with] probability 1 _− γ_ . 

## The loss function for one sample _**x**_ is given by 

**==> picture [212 x 14] intentionally omitted <==**

The loss function is minimized using Adam optimizer. The optimizer is ran for 30k batch evaluations, with learning rate starting at 0.001 and reduced by a factor of 0.3 at 10k and 20k steps. The models were saved every 5k steps. The parameter sweep was performed for parameter _γ ∈_ [0 _.,_ 0 _._ 2 _,_ 0 _._ 4 _,_ 0 _._ 6 _,_ 0 _._ 8 _,_ 1 _._ 0] and for prediction length _T_ pred _∈_ [20 _,_ 50 _,_ 100 _,_ 200]. 

## A.4 RECURRENT STATE SPACE MODEL (RSSM) 

The recurrent state space model (Hafner et al., 2019) combines a deterministic recurrent neural network with stochastic states. The generative model is given by the following relations: 

Deterministic state model: _zt_ = _f_ ( _zt−_ 1 _, st−_ 1) _,_ Stochastic state model: _st ∼ p_ ( _st | zt_ ) _,_ Observation model: _xt ∼ p_ ( _xt | st, zt_ ) _,_ 

with _zt_ being the deterministic states, _st_ the stochastic states, and _xt_ the observations. The deterministic model is implemented using a GRU network (Cho et al., 2014), the stochastic transition model with a two-layer fully connected network projecting to the parameters of a diagonal Gaussian distribution, and the same architecture is used for the observation model. The stochastic states are estimated using the encoder _q_ ( _**s**_ 1: _T |_ _**x**_ 1: _T_ ) =[�] _[T] t_ =1 _[q]_[(] _[s][t][|][h][t][, r][t]_[)][,][where] _[ r][t]_[are features extracted] from the observations, _rt_ = _g_ ( _**x**_ 1: _T_ ), using the same dilated convolutional network architecture as for the DPDSR model. The mapping from the features and deterministic states is again implemented using a two-layer fully connected network. Finally, the initial deterministic state _h_ 0 = _h_ 0( _r_ 0) is computed from the features, again using a two-layer fully connected network. The parameters of the networks are optimized by minimizing the model ELBO, 

**==> picture [390 x 31] intentionally omitted <==**

For the observation overshooting, or multi-step prediction, we use the equivalent adaptation of the cost function as in (Hafner et al., 2019), except that the _d_ -step prediction distribution _p_ ( _st|st−d_ ) is used in the reconstruction term (first term in (12)) and not the second term as in latent overshooting of (Hafner et al., 2019). The generative model and the encoder networks otherwise remain the same. For the overshooting approach we have performed parameter sweep over the maximal overshooting distance _d ∈_ [3 _,_ 10 _,_ 20 _,_ 40100] and we selected the best performing model We have not evaluated latent overshooting approach, as its main motivation in (Hafner et al., 2019) was computational cost of the observation model which is comparatively small in our conditions. 

For all variants, the loss function is minimized using Adam optimizer. The optimizer is ran for 30k batch evaluations, with learning rate starting at 0.001 and reduced by a factor of 0.3 at 10k and 20k steps. The models were saved every 5k steps. 

## A.5 EVALUATION CRITERIA 

Dynamical system reconstruction aims at training models that can robustly reproduce the temporal patterns observed in the training data on long-term scale. In this spirit we evaluate the models using 

21 

two measures evaluating long-term behavior, distribution distance _Dd_ and spectral distance _Ds_ , and one measure of short-term prediction capacity, 20-step prediction error PE20. The first two are evaluated by a comparison of long model-generated time series with the original data. To generate the data, we take a point on the embedded state trajectory (via trained projection embedding method, or time delay embedding depending on the model). Using this point as initial conditions, we evolve the system for 40000 steps, using random noise for stochastic models. 

The distribution distance _Dd_ measures the similarity of the distribution of the original and generated data in the observation space. To calculate it, we take the original and simulated data, collapse them across time, and compare the distributions using the Wasserstein distance (also known as Earth mover’s distance). Loosely speaking, the Wasserstein distance correspond to the cost of reshaping one distribution into the other by transporting the mass. In one dimension, the Wasserstein distance between two probability distributions _u_ and _v_ with cumulative distribution functions _Fu_ and _Fv_ is defined as: 

**==> picture [277 x 24] intentionally omitted <==**

We use the SciPy implementation for computations. 

The spectral distance _Ds_ measures the similarity of the long time series in frequency space. To calculate it, we compute the power spectral density of the original and simulated data using Welch’s method (using the SciPy implementation) with segment length equal to 4096 points. We smooth the frequency spectra using a Gaussian filter with _σ_ = 2 time points, normalize them, and calculate their Hellinger distance. The Hellinger distance for two discrete distributions _U_ and _V_ is given by 

**==> picture [148 x 31] intentionally omitted <==**

We also consider a measure of short term prediction capability, the _n_ -step prediction error. For data chunk _**x**_ = ( _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, . . . , xT_ ) we use the first _k_ time points to estimate the latent state at time _k_ _**x**_ ˜-th = (˜step. _xk_ +1 _, . . . ,_ We then ˜ _xk_ +repeatedly _n_ ). The prediction error is thensimulate the next _n_ steps to with random noise obtain predictions 

**==> picture [122 x 28] intentionally omitted <==**

which we average over 20 random noise samples (for probabilistic models only) and 2000 chunks from the test dataset. 

For the ECG dataset, we also measure the distance between the original and simulated distributions of the interspike intervals _D_ ISI. To do so, use the long time series generated as described above, and we detect the peaks in the signal using the SciPy find ~~p~~ eaks tool with height 2 and prominence 1. We then then set _D_ ISI to be the Wasserstein distance (13) between the ISI distributions from the data and simulated signal. 

We calculate the overall score as weighted sum of the distribution distance _Dd_ , spectral distance _Ds_ , 20-step prediction error PE20, and (for ECG) the distance of ISI distributions _D_ ISI. 

**==> picture [170 x 9] intentionally omitted <==**

Given the different nature of the datasets, we set the weights differently across datasets. For the Lorenz and Cell datasets, we use _**w**_ = ( _w_ 1 _, w_ 2 _, w_ 3 _, w_ 4) = (1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 0). For the Double well, RNN, and Neuron datasets, where the predictability is lower, we reduce the weight on PE20, _**w**_ = (1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 0 _._ 2 _,_ 0). For the ECG dataset, we include the distance of interspike intervals, _D_ ISI as an important measure of the reconstruction quality, _**w**_ = (1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 0 _._ 05). The weight is chosen lower due to large magnitude of unnormalized values. All measures are evaluated on a test dataset which was not used for training the model. 

## A.6 ANALYSIS OF THE ATTRACTORS 

To identify the attractors in the state space of the model, we randomly select 100 points on the state space trajectory obtained by projecting the training data into the state space using the trained 

22 

encoder. We then simulate the system forward for _T_ warmup + _T_ steps with _T_ warmup = 1000 and _T_ = 20000. For stochastic models, we set the noise in the simulation to zero. After discarding the first _T_ warmup steps to allow the transients to decay, the remaining trajectories are analyzed to detect distinct attractors. For each trajectory we compare it against previously identified attractors by computing pairwise distances between trajectory points. Specifically, for each candidate new attractor trajectory _**z**[a] ∈_ R _[T][ ×][d][z]_ and an already identified attractor _**z**[b] ∈_ R _[T][ ×][d][z]_ , we compute two way distances between the attractors, 

**==> picture [154 x 52] intentionally omitted <==**

where Q ( _·, q_ ) denotes the _q_ -th quantile. We define the attractor distance as _da,b_ = max( _da→b, db→a_ ), and consider the attractors to be distinct if _da,b >_ tol, with tol = 10 _[−]_[5] if the already identified attractor _b_ is a fixed point, and tol = 10 _[−]_[1] for a limit cycle or a chaotic attractor. We use the quantile instead of maximum for computing the distances, and relatively high tolerances, both for more robust solution when dealing with trajectories with finite length; this is at a cost of possibly conflating close attractors. 

For each new attractor we calculate the maximal Lyapunov exponent _λ_ max numerically (Sprott, 2003). In the algorithm, we take a point on the attractor and a point with a small perturbation. We repeatedly advance the trajectories from the initial points using the deterministic dynamics, while rescaling the deviation of the perturbed trajectory to its original norm at every step. We advance the system for 1000 time steps for, and calculate _λ_ max as an average from the estimates from all steps. We consider the attractor chaotic if _λ_ max _>_ 0, limit cycle if _λ_ max _≤_ 0 and the trajectory does not converge to a single point (with tol = 10 _[−]_[5] ), and fixed point otherwise. 

## B SUPPLEMENTARY RESULTS 

## B.1 ARCHITECTURE VARIATIONS 

## B.1.1 NUMBER OF PARAMETERS IN THE GENERATIVE MODEL 

We investigated how does the performance of the stochastic DPDSR method change when the number of parameters in the generative model is increased or decreased. In particular, we aimed at a comparison with the behavior of its deterministic modification: the SPDSR method. We considered three problems, the Cell, Double well, and ECG datasets. For each, we trained stochastic and deterministic models with 16 to 2048 units in the hidden layer of the generative model (2), and evaluated the models as before. 

Fig. S1 shows that the behavior of the method depends on the dataset. For the Cell dataset, generated by a low-dimensional deterministic model, both DPDSR and SPDSR behave similarly, with increasing performance for increasing number of parameters. For the Double well dataset, generated by a noise-driven model, the stochastic model performs well even for minimal number of parameters, and consistently outperforms the deterministic model. For the ECG dataset we see that the deterministic models perform equally well across the range of parameters. The stochastic models, however, perform considerably worse for models with less than 100 units in the hidden layer, but outperform the deterministic models for larger hidden layers. 

## B.1.2 ENCODER ARCHITECTURE 

We further investigated the role of the encoder architecture on the performance of the DPDSR method (Fig. S2). Specifically, we compared the baseline architecture with two modifications: First, a variation with a noise encoder with the autoregressive RNN removed, and with the parameters otherwise kept equal as described in Tab. S1. Second, a variation with a autogressive RNN in noise encoder also removed, but with increased number of channels (26 instead of 24) in the dilated convolutional neural network to keep the total number of parameters approximately equal. Degradation in performance with the removed RNN can be seen for the Double well problem, while for the Cell and ECG problems the modification have little impact. 

23 

**==> picture [358 x 205] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Score Distribution distance Spectral distance PE20<br>2<br>DPDSR<br>1 0.5 0.5 0.5 SPDSR<br>0 0.0 0.0 0.0<br>10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3]<br>2<br>0.50<br>0.5<br>1 0.5<br>0.25<br>0 0.00 0.0 0.0<br>10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3]<br>ISI distance<br>2<br>0.2 0.4 0.5 100<br>1<br>0.1 0.2 50<br>0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0<br>10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3] 10 [2] 10 [3]<br>Hidden size Hidden size Hidden size Hidden size Hidden size<br>Cell<br>Double well<br>ECG<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure S1: Effect of the number of units in the hidden layers. The effect on the model quality was investigated for three datasets (rows), the score and the separate measures of reconstruction quality are in the columns. For clearer visualization, the results were clipped at the upper limit of the shown range. 

**==> picture [358 x 204] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Score Distribution distance Spectral distance PE20<br>0.10<br>0.2 0.1 0.05<br>0.05<br>0.0 0.00 0.0 0.00<br>0.10 1.0<br>0.4 0.2<br>0.2 0.05 0.1 0.5<br>0.0 0.00 0.0 0.0<br>ISI distance<br>1.0 0.2<br>0.050 10<br>0.2<br>0.5 0.025 0.1 5<br>0.0 0.000 0.0 0.0 0<br>Cell<br>Double well<br>ECG<br>Base Without RNN Without RNN matched Base Without RNN Without RNN matched Base Without RNN Without RNN matched Base Without RNN Without RNN matched Base Without RNN Without RNN matched<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure S2: Role of the encoder architecture. For three datasets, three variations of the DPDSR model architecture were investigated: the baseline, a variation with the autoregressive RNN in the noise encoder removed, and a variation with the autoregressive RNN removed, but increased number of parameters in the convolutional neural network to match the total parameters. For each variant, four models with different random weight initializations were trained. 

24 

**==> picture [397 x 284] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Lorenz Cell cycle Double well<br>Data Data Data<br>DPDSR DPDSR DPDSR<br>SPDSR SPDSR SPDSR<br>GTF-TD GTF-TD GTF-TD<br>DKF DKF DKF<br>ARLSTM ARLSTM ARLSTM<br>RSSM RSSM RSSM<br>RSSM-OO RSSM-OO RSSM-OO<br>0 250 500 750 1000 0 250 500 750 1000 0 250 500 750 1000<br>Time Time Time<br>RNN Neuron ECG<br>Data Data Data<br>DPDSR DPDSR DPDSR<br>SPDSR SPDSR SPDSR<br>GTF-TD GTF-TD GTF-TD<br>DKF DKF DKF<br>ARLSTM ARLSTM ARLSTM<br>RSSM RSSM RSSM<br>RSSM-OO RSSM-OO RSSM-OO<br>0 250 500 750 1000 0 250 500 750 1000 0 250 500 750 1000<br>Time Time Time<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure S3: Examples of generated time series for all test problems and evaluated methods. The time is represented in sample indices and not the original model or real time. 

25 

**==> picture [397 x 453] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
DPDSR SPDSR<br>0.05 0.05<br>2 2<br>100<br>1 1<br>0.00 0.00<br>0 0 0<br>1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200 1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200<br>0.05 0.05<br>2 2<br>100<br>0.00 0.00<br>1 50 1<br>0.05 0 0 0.05 0<br>1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200 1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200<br>2 2<br>0.0 0.0<br>100<br>0.1 1 0.1 1<br>0.2 0 0 0.2 0<br>1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200 1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200<br>0.05 0.05<br>2 200 2<br>0.00 0.00<br>1 100 1<br>0.05 0 0 0.05 0<br>1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200 1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200<br>2 2<br>0.0 200 0.0<br>1 1<br>0.1 0.1<br>0 0 0<br>1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200 1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200<br>0.02 0.02<br>100<br>2 2<br>0.00 1 50 0.00 1<br>0.02 0 0 0.02 0<br>1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200 1 10 20 40 60 80 100 200<br>max KL max<br>Lorenz Score Score<br>max KL max<br>Score Score<br>Cell cycle<br>max KL max<br>Score Score<br>Double well<br>RNN max Score KL max Score<br>max KL max<br>Neuron Score Score<br>ECG max Score KL max Score<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure S4: Analysis of the attractors of the trained models for all datasets, extending Fig. 4. Left column: DPDSR models (stochastic); right column: SPDSR models (deterministic). Circles show the maximal Lyapunov exponent. Dashed circle outline represents a chaotic attractor ( _λ_ max _>_ 0), colored solid outline represents a limit cycle, and black solid outline a fixed point. Size of the circle corresponds to the size of the basin of attraction. Solid red line shows the score (lower = better). Dashed green line shows the KL divergence of the estimated posterior distribution of the noise to the prior distribution KL _ϵ_ = _D_ KL( _q_ ( _**ϵ** |_ _**x**_ ) _∥ p_ ( _**ϵ**_ )). The yellow band indicates the optimal _τ_ value for the dataset; note that the optimal _τ_ value is selected based on the mean score across all initializations, while for other visualizations we plot only the best model. For clearer visualization, the positions of the Lyapunov exponents are clipped to the shown interval. 

26 

